---
layout: post
title: Problem - Goal - Solution
subtitle: Everything clear?
date: 2023-10-20
background: /images/yosef-futsum-ZAvhxLTcSok-unsplash.jpg
---

The other day, we had a kickoff to a new initiative. Focus was put onto finding out what our goals are. People were afraid to jump into finding solutions or being too centered around current problems. These two sentences contain already the three concepts from the title: Problem, Goal, Solution.

## What is the problem here?

They seem to be intuitive, people use them every day for all sorts of situations. However, the more I thought about it the less I understood what they actually mean.

<iframe src="https://giphy.com/embed/d9e0qVZIehCUnGGCQi" width="480" height="480" frameBorder="0" class="giphy-embed" allowFullScreen></iframe><p><a href="https://giphy.com/gifs/laff-tv-movie-steve-martin-parenthood-d9e0qVZIehCUnGGCQi">via GIPHY</a></p>

Then I did what my reasearcher brain craved for: a definition! I had a quick look into literature and found one article that seemed to be pretty overthought for such a topic but still I liked the argumentation and clarity a lot and I often think about their quite simple concept.

## Digging in

So, the [article by Loenhoud, Lauenroth, and Steiger](https://re-magazine.ireb.org/articles/the-goal-is-to-solve-the-problem) article is from a magazine for requirements engineering, so not that far off actually.

Something they underline in their paper is that all these concepts are mental constructs of an experienced state. Might be obvious for some but that abstraction makes these concepts personally subjective.

### Problem

A problem is a negatively experienced state as a mental construct of a stakeholder. It is perceived as a risk if the corresponding state lies in the future. Sometimes it inhibits achieving a goal and most importantly, it inhibits a desirable behaviour.

### Goal

A goal is a mental construct concerning a positively anticipated state in the future. It enalbes stakeholders to do desirable things and also enables desirable behaviour.

### Solution

A solution is the connection between a problem and a goal. It is a way how a negative state can be changed into a desired state.

> So, we find that problems, solutions and goals form a trinity. They cannot exist without each other: if there is no problem, why define a goal? If there is no solution, just accept the problem as a fact; without a goal, there is no purpose for any solution.

## What to think about it?

As said in the beginning, this concept might seem obious to you. For me. it brought a lot of clarity with the simple connection of problem -> solution -> goal and their relation and dependency on each other as laid out in the quote. Let it sink in, it might come back and help you with your mental models of projects.

Picture by <a href="https://unsplash.com/de/@yosef_fxum?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Yosef Futsum</a> on <a href="https://unsplash.com/de/fotos/person-mit-lupe-bei-sonnenuntergang-ZAvhxLTcSok?utm_content=creditCopyText&utm_medium=referral&utm_source=unsplash">Unsplash</a>
