---
layout: post
title: AWS Load Balancers and AZs
subtitle: Cross-zone confusion
date: 2024-07-05
background: /images/yosef-futsum-ZAvhxLTcSok-unsplash.jpg
---

Architecture diagrams in AWS can get confusing very quickly. Even a simple architecture of one service calling another becomes becomes more colorfull if network infrastructure, mainly load balancers come into play.

## Availability zones

Another dimension in AWS are availability zones (AZs). These are different physical data centers that are placed apart from each other for reliability reason in case of a disaster. The recommendation is to run services in multiple if not all available availability zones, in our case `eu-central-1` those are three.

Not only all services that we build and deploy are running now in different data centers but also aws native services like load balancers. Application Load Balancers (ALBs) are supposedly one of the biggest consumers of EC2 instances and run in these different AZs themselves. Now, requests can be routed across availability zones from one data center to the other. This cross-zone traffic adds latency and cost to your system[^1]. This situation is not ideal but can it also add technical problems?

## Technical problems

Unfortunately, the answer is yes. We had a setup with three load balancers after each other for reasons that are out of scope here. There was one ALB, then a Network Load Balancer, another ALB which was followed by the actual application service.

!\[Image of three load balancers in three availability zones after each other with requests being routed cross zones.\]({{ BASEPATH }}/images/lbs.png "Setup of three load balancers in sequence")

A request could go via TCP/IP from the first ALB to one of the three instances of the NLB and then to one of the three instances of the ALB. That means one of the first ALBs can be connected to one of the latter ALBs via three different NLBs. NLBs work on the Transport Layer of the OSI model, and the client IP address is not overwritten (`client_ip_preservation`). That means the latter ALB sees TCP connections with same client IP:port, server IP:port quadruples. These quadruples are called socket pairs and need to be unique [^2].

This collision resulted in a large amount of TCP RST packets received on the NLB [^3]. After turning off `cross_zone_balancing` the number of TCP RSTs went down signifcantly. Additionally, the adjustment should spare us one potential AZ hop which reduces overall latency and costs.

[^1]: https://aws.amazon.com/de/blogs/architecture/improving-performance-and-reducing-cost-using-availability-zone-affinity/

[^2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Network_socket

[^3]: https://www.niels-ole.com/cloud/aws/linux/2020/10/18/nlb-resets.html
